GWEN IFILL: The earth rumbled
today in North
Korea with a big bang that shook
capitals
around the world. The communist
regime declared
it had carried out a
thermonuclear explosion,
which, if it turns out to be
true, would represent
a quantum leap beyond anything
it's managed
before.
The nuclear news was trumpeted
on North Korean
state television.
WOMAN (through translator): The
first hydrogen
bomb test was successfully
conducted at 10:00
on January 6, 2016.
GWEN IFILL: State TV also showed
photos of
the North Korean leader, Kim
Jong-un, signing
orders for what it called a
hydrogen bomb
test. But the announcement
broadcast on big
screens in the capital,
Pyongyang, was quickly
condemned around the world,
especially in
China, the North's last major
ally.
HUA CHUNYING, Spokeswoman,
Chinese Ministry
of Foreign Affairs (through
translator): Today,
North Korea carried out a
nuclear bomb test
once again, despite the
international community's
objections. The Chinese
government firmly
opposes this. To fulfill
denuclearization,
nuclear nonproliferation, peace
and stability
on the Korean Peninsula is
China's firm stance.
GWEN IFILL: Whether it was
really a hydrogen
bomb was also widely questioned,
especially
in neighboring South Korea.
LEE CHEOL-WOO, South Korean
National Assembly
(through translator): Judging
from the measurements,
it probably falls short of being
a hydrogen
bomb, although North Korea
claims it is a
hydrogen bomb.
GWEN IFILL: In Washington, White
House spokesman
Josh Earnest said the U.S. is
skeptical too.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
The initial analysis that's been
conducted
of the events that were reported
overnight
is not consistent with North
Korean claims
of hydrogen bomb test. There's
nothing that's
occurred in the last 24 hours
that's caused
the United States government to
change our
assessment of North Korea's
technical and
military capabilities.
GWEN IFILL: Meanwhile, Japan's
government
immediately sent an aircraft out
to collect
air particles for radiation
analysis.
A working hydrogen bomb would be
hundreds
of times more powerful than what
North Korea
detonated in three earlier
underground tests.
And, if miniaturized, it might
fit on a missile,
as the communist regime claims.
Pyongyang has long sought to
develop missiles
that could reach the Western
United States.
The U.N. Security Council
branded the test
a clear threat to international
peace and
security and it pledged to
pursue additional
sanctions.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon:
BAN KI-MOON, United Nations
Secretary-General:
This act is profoundly
destabilizing for regional
security and seriously
undermines international
nonproliferation efforts. I
condemn it unequivocally.
GWEN IFILL: And U.S.
presidential candidates
weighed in, with Democrat
Hillary Clinton
calling for new sanctions as
well, and Republican
Ted Cruz saying the test showed
the folly
of failed Democratic policies.
A number of sanctions are
already in place
against North Korea, an isolated
nation with
more than 12 million people
living in extreme
poverty.
We will examine North Korea's
claims about
today's test, and what it all
means, after
the news summary.